 
 
 
 
PHYSIOLOGICAL AND BIOMECHANICAL PERSPECTIVES ON ELBOW FUNCTION 
DURING FOREHAND AND BACKHAND DISC GOLF THROWS: A NOVEL 
INVESTIGATION 
 
by 
Lauren Rachelle Giles 
Liberty University 
 
 
A Dissertation Presented in Partial Fulfillment 
Of the Requirements for the Degree 
Doctor of Philosophy 
 
Liberty University 
2024 
   
 
2 
 
PHYSIOLOGICAL AND BIOMECHANICAL PERSPECTIVES ON ELBOW FUNCTION 
DURING FOREHAND AND BACKHAND DISC GOLF THROWS: A NOVEL 
INVESTIGATION 
by Lauren Rachelle Giles 
 
A Dissertation Presented in Partial Fulfillment 
Of the Requirements for the Degree 
Doctor of Philosophy 
 
 
Liberty University, Lynchburg, VA 
2024 
 
 
 
 
APPROVED BY: 
 
Eric Sobolewski, PhD, Committee Chair 
 
S. Kyle Travis, PhD, Committee Member 
 
Michael Olson, PhD, Committee Member   
 
3 
ABSTRACT 
Over 81% of players have reported injuries linked to disc golfing, predominantly due to 
overuse. Since disc golf originated, there is a lack of research on the proper biomechanics of the 
disc golf throw. This descriptive, quantitative study seeks to be the first. We investigated 6 
females and 35 males, aged 21-66, registered to compete in disc golf. The goal was to examine 
the kinetic parameters of healthy disc golfers to identify biomechanics likely associated with 
safety. Research questions investigated whether there is a connection between lean body mass 
and disc distance traveled, elbow torque and disc distance, or grip strength and torque on the 
elbow. After recruitment from tournaments, biometric data including handgrip strength 
(dynamometer), body mass index, and body fat percentage (bioelectrical impedance assay), were 
collected. Torque was recorded using a Motus sensor during forehand and backhand throws. 
Assumption tests revealed that lean body mass, maximum backhand and forehand distance and 
handgrip MVIC were normally distributed, while torque on either style of throw were not. A 
two-tailed Pearson correlation indicated that while some relationships were observed, none were 
statistically significant, leading to a failure to reject the null hypotheses. Factors such as 
individual variation and form might explain this, although notable findings emerged. 
Specifically, some torque measures surpassed the upper limits established by studies in other 
sports. There are numerous opportunities for future research to build on the findings of this study 
including introducing a longitudinal aspect, expanding to other sports with different throwing 
forms, and expanding to torque with “swinging” sports such as tennis or golf. 
 
Keywords: disc golf, elbow torque, motus, elbow biomechanics, handgrip MVIC 
 
4 
Dedication 
I want to dedicate this accomplishment to Laurie Ennis, my first professional mentor. I 
am so grateful that her levity, patience, lightheartedness, and impartiality imprinted on me before 
she left this Earth, and I miss her every day. Eternally humble, Laurie would roll in her grave to 
think I worked so hard for this to then dedicate it fully to her, so: this is also for Me. I want to 
dedicate this to the past version of Me who would have never predicted we’d be here (for so 
many reasons), and the future version of Me (who I can only hope will be using retirement to 
adopt dogs from hospice to give them the best final days on a tropical island). 
Finally, this is for all of the powerhouse women who came before me. Your stories of 
wishing you did it, or did it sooner, instilled such a sense of urgency in me. I am so grateful 
to you as I stand here, completing a PhD. You all know who you are. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
5 
Acknowledgments 
Thank you, Justin. Your only question in this endeavor was if it was good for my mental 
health to take on so much. I can’t think of a way a partner could be more supportive than you. 
You always know the thing that will heal my spirit - and you book the trip knowing that that 
thing is usually a trip to an island or the French Quarter. I am so lucky to have you as my rock. 
Thank you, Kelly, for holding me down now and always, and for supporting all of my 
ideas from day zero. One of the best things that’s happened to me is that life put us in the same 
office all those years ago. I truly don’t think I would have been here without you. 
A huge shout out to Maddie and Sophie, who took the back burner in terms of my 
attention and free time more than I would have liked. Endless fetch and walks are in your future. 
Thank you, Summer, for being there to pick me up and dust me off time and time again. I 
am so grateful to have you offset the chaos that comes into my life with sensitivity and patience. 
Thank you Kelley, for being a great listener and for reminding me to take care of myself. 
You are so good at softening the blow when I get bad news and helping me to see clearly. 
Thank you, Ted and Dr. Medler. I’m sure none of us foresaw that you’d be mentoring me 
for decades when I walked into your classrooms all those years ago. I am so thankful that you’re 
still enriching my life with your advice, experience, and encouragement. 
Thank you Jen; for caffeinating and counseling me, Cody and Emily; for balancing my 
work with the most fun distractions, and Mike; for listening. It is impossible to name and thank 
everyone properly in one page. Thank you Ramses, Max, Josh, Melissa, Clint, Amy, Foulk, 
Chris, Joe, Brad, Derek, Bob, Ashlyn, Abigail and Damon. I must’ve done something 
exceptionally good in a past life to get to meet such kindhearted, amazing people and be 
fortunate enough to make them a part of my circle.  
 
113 
Table 26 
Pearson Correlation; Backhand Maximum Distance vs. Torque (RQ3) 
 
Table 27 
Pearson Correlation; Forehand Maximum Distance vs. Torque (RQ3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
114 
Figure 13 
Scatterplot; Backhand Maximum Distance vs. Torque (RQ3) 
 
 
Figure 14 
Scatterplot; Forehand Maximum Distance vs. Torque (RQ3) 
 
 
 
115 
APPENDIX B 
 
Lauren Giles  
Eric Sobolewski, Lauren Giles  
Re: IRB Approval - IRB-FY23-24-2090 Quantification of Disc Golf Throwing Biomechanics and Relationship of Throwing 
Performance to Subject Demographics  
Dear Lauren Giles, Eric Sobolewski, Lauren Giles,  
We are pleased to inform you that your study has been approved by the Liberty University Institutional Review Board 
(IRB). This approval is extended to you for one year from the following date: July 31, 2024. If you need to make changes to 
the methodology as it pertains to human subjects, you must submit a modification to the IRB. Modifications can be 
completed through your Cayuse IRB account.  
Your study falls under the expedited review category (45 CFR 46.110), which is applicable to specific, minimal risk studies 
and minor changes to approved studies for the following reason(s):  
4. Collection of data through noninvasive procedures (not involving general anesthesia or sedation) routinely employed in 
clinical practice, excluding procedures involving x-rays or microwaves. Where medical devices are employed, they must be 
cleared/approved for marketing. (Studies intended to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the medical device are not 
generally eligible for expedited review, including studies of cleared medical devices for new indications.)  
For a PDF of your approval letter, click on your study number in the My Studies card on your Cayuse dashboard. 
Next, click the Submissions bar beside the Study Details bar on the Study Details page. Finally, click Initial under 
Submission Type and choose the Letters tab toward the bottom of the Submission Details page. Your stamped 
consent form(s) and final versions of your study documents can be found on the same page under the 
Attachments tab. Your stamped consent form(s) should be copied and used to gain the consent of your research 
participants. If you plan to provide your consent information electronically, the contents of the attached consent 
document(s) should be made available without alteration.  
Thank you for your cooperation with the IRB, and we wish you well with your research project.  
Sincerely,  
G. Michele Baker, PhD, CIP  
Administrative Chair  
Research Ethics Office 
 
  
July 31, 2024  
 