This item was submitted to 
Loughborough's 
Research Repository
 by the author. 
Items in Figshare are protected by copyright, with all rights reserved, unless otherwise 
indicated.
Biomechanical analysis of disc golf throws to improve performance
Biomechanical analysis of disc golf throws to improve performance
PLEASE CITE THE PUBLISHED VERSION
LICENCE
CC BY 4.0
REPOSITORY RECORD
Attias, Cedric E, Kat Webster, Clark Dickerson, and John McPhee. 2024. “Biomechanical Analysis of Disc
Golf Throws to Improve Performance”. Loughborough University.
https://doi.org/10.17028/rd.lboro.27045130.v1. 
Corresponding author email: cattias@uwaterloo.ca 
Biomechanical Analysis of Disc Golf Throws to Improve Performance 
 
Cedric E. Attias1, Kat Webster2, Clark Dickerson2 and John McPhee3 
1 Mechanical Engineering, 2 Kinesiology, 3 Systems Design Engineering, University of Waterloo, 200 
University Ave West, Waterloo, ON, N2L 3G1, Canada  
 
Introduction 
Disc golf (DG) has recently seen a large growth in popularity. UDisc, a DG app reported a 50% 
increase in their player base in 2020 compared to 2019 [1]. Despite this growth,  very little 
literature correlates technique to performance maximization. This study aimed to gain insight 
into the biomechanics of forehand and backhand DG throws and to relate these findings to 
the skill level of the participants. Skill is assessed by relating the throwing mechanics of an 
athlete to their  Professional Disc Golf Association (PDGA) rating, which assigns athletes a 
number to reflect their performance in PDGA events. The range of PDGA ratings is from the 
600s (beginners) to the low 1000s for top professionals [1].  In this study, the participants 
ranged from the 800s to low 1000 ratings.  
Methods 
The dataset included 28 participants, including 23 male and 5 female players. Each athlete 
provided informed consent to participate in the study, and the study was conducted in 
accordance with the Office of Research Ethics at the University of Waterloo. Subject 
information was collected and anonymized. The  subject was fit with 41 individual motion 
capture markers spanning the bony landmarks of the subject’s shank, thigh, spine, chest , 
upper arm, forearm, and head. An 8-camera VICON MX20+ motion tracking system (Vicon, 
Oxford, UK) was used to measure the 3-dimensional kinematics of the throw. Five backhand 
and five forehand throws were recorded for each participant. The players threw an Innova 
Disc Golf Destroyer (Innova Disc Golf, Rock Hill, USA) driver into a net, in an indoor lab setting. 
The participants were instructed to throw with full power while maintaining their standard 
throwing mechanics, which may have been impacted by the experimental setup (i.e. 
unfamiliarity with motion capture markers, indoor setting, and no official target). 
Once data was collected, motion capture marker points were  exported, fit and 
interpolated to account for gaps in the data. Using the measured data, a musculoskeletal 
(MSK) model was created in Visual3D (V3D) software. This process began with a static 
calibration dataset, which was used to match each marker to anatomical landmarks in the 
software. The defined landmarks were used to create skeletal components, which created a 
full skeletal model when put together . The articulation of two segments was defined as a 
joint. Dynamic throwing datasets were applied to the static MSK model, generating a 
throwing animation for each trial. An automated data pipeline was developed within the 
software to extract desired kinematics, which were selected from previous literature [2,3]. 
The selected movements were: elbow flexion/extension, forearm pronation/supination, 
shoulder horizontal abduction/adduction, and X-Factor (the relative rotation of the trunk to 
hips). The 3-dimensional coordinates and timesteps were exported from V3D and simulation 
ISEA 2024 - The Engineering of Sport 15, Loughborough University, UK 
Corresponding author email: cattias@uwaterloo.ca 
start and end points were specified. The timesteps were then converted into a percentage of 
the specified swinging motion and the data was plotted and compared in Microsoft Excel. 
Analysis was conducted on only 6 right -handed subjects, for a total of 13 shots, 4 of which 
were forehand and 9 of which were backhand. 
Results and Discussion 
Through the analysis of the plotted kinematics, trends in the higher-rated PDGA players were 
identified. During a backhand, higher-rated players had faster horizontal abduction of the 
shoulder, a greater range of shoulder adduction during the wind-up due to contributions of 
trunk rotation, greater torso range of motion and velocity of trunk rotation, and a greater 
transition range and velocity of both the wrist pronation/supination and elbow 
flexion/extension. During a forehand, higher-rated players generated a greater torso 
contribution due to an increased range of motion and velocity of trunk rotation, a larger 
degree of elbow extension during the wind-up and most notably, a faster and wider transition 
range from supination and pronation of the forearm, which generated a prominent wrist snap 
at release. This can be seen in Figure 1, where generally, higher-rated players (ratings 
indicated in bracketed numbers) demonstrated the widest range of supination and pronation. 
Additionally, the steeper transition of said movements indicated a greater wrist snap velocity 
during disc release.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Degree of forearm supination/pronation (left) during forehand throw simulation (right) for variously 
rated PDGA subjects. The simulation image was captured after disc release, at the beginning of follow-through. 
In general, the higher-rated players presented a faster and more seamless transition 
within the upper-body kinetic chain, while also achieving a greater range of motion for all 
movement. These biomechanical factors likely contribute to an increased velocity and spin of 
the disc at launch, which enables the athlete to maximize performance by increasing the carry 
distance of the projectile during flight [3].The findings of this study will contribute to the 
growth and quality of the disc golf game  by providing both novice and experienced players 
with biomechanical technique guidelines to improve their performance.  
References 
1. (2020) UDisc: The disc golf growth report. https://udisc.com/disc- golf-growth-report. Accessed 6 Sep 
2023. 
2. Hummel SA (2003) Frisbee flight simulation and throw biomechanics. Dissertation, University of 
California, Davis. 
3. Sasakawa K, Sakurai S (2008) Biomechanical analysis of the sidearm throwing motion for distance of a 
flying disc: A comparison of skilled and unskilled ultimate players. Sports Biomech, 7(3):311-321. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14763140802270936. 
ISEA 2024 - The Engineering of Sport 15, Loughborough University, UK