Vol.:(0123456789)1 3
Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization (2021) 65:12 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00158-021-03107-7
INDUSTRIAL APPLICATION PAPER
Optimal design for disc golf by computational fluid dynamics 
and machine learning
Eero Immonen1 
Received: 2 May 2021 / Revised: 8 October 2021 / Accepted: 21 October 2021 / Published online: 18 December 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021, corrected publication 2022
Abstract
In this article, we introduce a computational methodology for golf disc shape optimization that employs a novel disc shape 
parameterization by cubic B-splines. Through application of batch Computational Fluid Dynamics simulations and Machine 
Learning, the disc parameterization yields functional relationships—so-called shape surrogate models—between the flying 
rotating disc shape and its flight characteristics. The shape surrogate models facilitate free and constrained optimization in 
both single- and multiobjective settings, such that both aerodynamic (drag and lift) and structural (mass and moment of iner-
tia) features of the disc are addressed simultaneously. Further, the Professional Disc Golf Association rules for permissible 
golf discs can be cast as nonlinear constraints for the computational optimization problem. The proposed numerical optimi-
zation method yields disc drag coefficient values as low as 0.48 (unconstrained) and 0.52 (constrained) and lift coefficient 
values as high as 0.26 (unconstrained) and 0.19 (constrained). The presented numerical optimization results also describe 
the many design tradeoffs between the discs that target long flight range (so-called drivers) and the discs that target flight at 
low speeds (so-called putters). Moreover, novel optimal rule compliant designs are presented for driver-type and putter-type 
discs, as well as their compromise, the so-called mid-range discs.
Keywords Computational design · Computational fluid dynamics · Disc golf · Drag coefficient · Lift coefficient · Machine 
learning · Constrained optimization · Multiobjective optimization · Surrogate model
List of symbols
/u1D6FF  Distance between P-k and X-axis
/u1D702  Growth parameter used in parameterization g
/u1D6FE/u1D6FA  Symmetry curve for a disc /u1D6FA , i.e., intersection of 
/u1D715/u1D6FA and XY−plane
̂N  Number of samples in training data for SSM 
identification
̂y  Prediction for y from parametric model
/u1D41E  Shape Surrogate Model for a given variable e
/u1D421  Vector of PDGA design constraints for shape 
optimization
/u1D40B  Lower bounds (vector) for disc parameters
/u1D414  Upper bounds (vector) for disc parameters
L  Minimum leaf size in a Regression Tree 
Ensemble
M  Number of learning cycles in the lsboost 
algorithm
N   Number of trees in a Regression Tree Ensemble
S  A subset of hypersurfaces of ℝ3
/u1D707  Learning rate parameter in the lsboost algorithm
/u1D6FA  Disc domain in ℝ3
y  Sample average of y across training data
/u1D715/u1D6FA  Surface of disc /u1D6FA
/u1D70C  Disc material density kg/m 3
/u1D70Ca  Density of air kg/m3
/u1D41A  Vector of hyperparameters for an SSM
/u1D431/u1D715/u1D6FA  Parameter vector representing disc /u1D6FA
/u1D709k, /u1D41Ak  Parameters to be optimized during lsboost 
algorithm
AX  Disc projection area in X-direction
AZ  Disc projection area in Z-direction
cd  Drag coefficient
cl  Lift coefficient
d  Disc diameter, i.e., 2 × maximal distance between 
/u1D6FE/u1D6FA and X-axis
D  Latin Hypercube Design matrix (Dk,i)
f  Shape Surrogate Model
Responsible Editor: Nathalie Bartoli.
 * Eero Immonen 
 eero.immonen@turkuamk.fi
1 Computational Engineering and Analysis Research Group, 
Turku University of Applied Sciences, 20520 Turku, Finland E. Immonen 
1 312 Page 2 of 17
Fd  Drag force [N] in Z-direction
Fl  Lift force [N] in X-direction
g  Parameterization function for disc surfaces
IX  Moment of inertia about X-axis
k − /u1D716  Two equation model involving turbulent kinetic 
energy and turbulent dissipation
k − /u1D714  Two equation eddy-viscosity model for turbulent 
flow simulation
L  Precessional rolling moment about Z-axis
l  Disc height [m], i.e., maximal distance between 
points on /u1D715/u1D6FA in the X-direction
M  Pitching moment about Y-axis
m  Disc mass [kg]
N  Number of rows in a Latin Hypercube Design
p  Multivariate polynomial
q  Disc rotation speed [rad/s] about Y-axis
r  Disc rotation speed [rad/s] about X-axis
r  Disc rotation speed [rad/s] about Z-axis
R2  Coefficient of determination
tm  Minimum disc thickness [m]
v  Disc flight velocity [m/s] along Z-axis
y/u1D6FA  Any disc characteristic (y) that only depends on 
disc shape /u1D6FA
AoA  Angle of attack [◦]
CAD  Computer-Aided Design
CART   Classification and Regression Trees algorithm
CFD  Computational Fluid Dynamics
cog  Center of gravity
cop  Center of pressure
CV  Cross-Validation
MAE  Mean Absolute Error
ML  Machine Learning
MVP  Multivariate polynomial
P-k  Control points k = 1, … , 19 for B-spline approxi-
mation of /u1D6FE/u1D6FA
PDGA  Professional Disc Golf Association
RANS  Reynolds-Averaged Navier–Stokes (equations)
RTE  Regression Tree Ensemble
SSM  Shape Surrogate Model
SST  Shear Stress Transport
1 Introduction
1.1  Background
Disc golf is a sport that is similar to traditional golf, but 
instead of a club and a ball, players use rotating flying discs 
thrown toward standing baskets in as few intermediate 
steps as possible. Although perhaps not yet as popular as 
traditional golf, the disc sport is spreading rapidly across 
the world. In 2020, the Professional Disc Golf Association 
(PDGA) reported 71016 active members worldwide, 33% 
growth from 2019. Further, the number of recreational disc 
golf players is considerably larger than this. For example, 
in Finland alone, single-disc golf courses have reportedly 
been visited by over 2000 players on a weekly basis in 2020.
While the ball shape and appearance in traditional golf 
are rather fixed (clubs do vary), considerable shape variation 
is allowed in golf discs. Indeed, players attempt to choose the 
most suitable disc for each throw situation and course layout, 
by exploiting the discs’ different flight characteristics. Golf 
discs are typically categorized as drivers, mid-rangers, or 
putters, and there are currently over 1300 different-shaped 
discs approved by PDGA. However, perhaps due to commer-
cial interests or complexity of the physics of rotating flight, 
surprisingly little academic research has been reported on 
the disc design principles and methodologies, which are the 
focus of this article.
To describe their products, golf disc manufacturers typi-
cally list four integer parameters called speed, glide, turn, 
and fade. The first two relate to the disc’s aerodynamic drag 
and lift characteristics in horizontal flight, whereas the latter 
two relate to its pitching moment in inclined flight conditions 
(Lorenz 2007; Menickelli and Pickens 2016). Unfortunately, 
the reported numerical values of these four parameters are 
not based on measurements, but opinions of testers nor are 
such values standardized across different disc manufactur -
ers. Thus, in particular, the listed parameter values do not 
directly tell a player which disc he or she should use in any 
given throw situation. The problem is compounded by indi-
vidual variation: An amateur player (with limited power and 
technique) might be better off with a different disc than a 
professional player, for (say) covering the most distance in 
a single throw (Menickelli and Pickens 2016). These obser-
vations make development of a systematic golf disc design 
methodology both challenging and an important research 
question, which is addressed herein.
1.2  Contribution and limitations
The purpose of the present article is to introduce a computa-
tional methodology for golf disc shape optimization, based 
on Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) and Machine 
Learning (ML). The proposed methodology employs a 
novel disc shape parameterization by cubic B-splines that 
can be harnessed for batch solution of CFD simulation cases. 
In contrast to the four vague disc shape parameters listed 
above (speed, glide, turn, fade), the proposed parameteriza-
tion yields precise functional relationships between the disc 
shape and its flight characteristics. These relationships, or 
shape surrogate models  (SSM), are first identified in the 
present article through extensive CFD simulations and ML 
methods and are then used in numerical optimization.
The SSMs facilitate free and constrained optimiza -
tion in both single- and multiobjective settings, such that Optimal design for disc golf by computational fluid dynamics and machine learning  
1 3 Page 3 of 17 12
both aerodynamic (drag and lift) and structural (mass and 
moment of inertia) features of the shape are addressed 
simultaneously. The upshot is that the PDGA rules for 
permissible golf discs can be cast as nonlinear constraints 
for the computational optimization problem.
To demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed methodol-
ogy, we carry out numerical solution of several optimiza-
tion problems. They aim to
– Establish general principles of rotating flying disc 
design for improving flight characteristics, without 
constraints on the shapes beyond a minimum thickness;
– Describe tradeoffs between minimum-drag and maxi -
mum-lift shape solutions (see Subsect.  2.1);
– Resolve such golf disc shapes that both meet the PDGA 
rules, cast as numerical optimization constraints, and 
yield the longest range (drivers), best flight at low 
speeds (putters), or their compromise (mid-rangers).
Throughout this analysis, we confine our attention to 
horizontal disc flight, with zero angle of attack (AoA). 
Moreover, we assume stationary air (i.e., windless) condi-
tions. It is well known (see Subsect.  2.1) that, even in such 
ideal conditions, gyroscopic precession tends to change 
the disc’s alignment during rotating flight. Indeed, disc 
golf players occasionally exploit this tendency by impos-
ing an initial inclination in throw or by choosing a disc 
with significant curvature in flight trajectory. In the present 
work, one part of the disc shape optimization problem is 
to minimize this tendency for alignment change during 
flight by maximizing the disc’s moment of inertia with 
respect to the axis of forced rotation. Thus, we optimize 
discs for linear motion, which, by the above, is not always 
preferred by players in practice. Moreover, we neglect all 
grip-related preferences in golf disc design and assume 
that the presented disc flight characteristics can be realized 
in actual throws.
The approach proposed herein is computational, but 
we emphasize that the CFD-based golf disc aerodynam -
ics modeling method we utilize is extensively validated by 
comparing our CFD predictions to measurement data and 
earlier CFD analyses reported in the literature. Although 
the optimal disc shape solutions presented in this article 
comply with first principles of fluid mechanics, they are not 
guaranteed to be globally optimal ones. This is because the 
proposed disc shape parameterization does not cover all pos-
sible disc shapes and because the optimization algorithms 
are not guaranteed to yield global solutions for such non-
linear problems. Finally, in this article, we do not address 
the manufacturability of the presented optimal shape discs 
beyond the requirement that the minimum surface thick -
ness must always exceed a given threshold of 0.5 mm (see 
Subsect.  2.5.2).
1.3  Relation to literature
1.3.1  Rotational flight
The dynamics of rotational flight is relevant for many differ-
ent sports (Goff 2013), among others. Its relative complexity 
arises from the interplay of fluid mechanics—i.e., lift and 
drag—and structural mechanics—i.e., moments induced by 
rotation and translation. At the turn of the millennium, sev-
eral researchers worldwide started working toward under -
standing these phenomena for rotating discs, using experi-
mental and (then emerging) computational approaches. The 
history of flying discs up to that era is well documented in 
the work of Potts and Crowther (2002) and Potts (2005) who 
also reported extensive experimental results on the aero-
dynamics of flying discs. Their results were subsequently 
complemented by Kamaruddin (2011) who experimentally 
evaluated the effect of different disc shape parameters on the 
aerodynamics. One important conclusion of these experi-
mental results, which is also at the core of the optimization 
approach proposed in this article, is that the aerodynamic lift 
and drag coefficients (cf. Subsect. 2.1)  are independent of 
the spinning motion of the disc (Potts and Crowther 2002).
The experimental research cited above was carried out in 
wind tunnel laboratory conditions. Carrying out experimen-
tal work on rotating flying discs outside wind tunnels is not 
an easy challenge. We mention the recent work of Weizman 
et al. (2020) and that of Lee et al. (2018). Both proposed 
sensor architectures and algorithms for estimating the aero-
dynamic coefficients. Instrumentation was also considered 
by Mustafin et al. (2012). In the present article, we focus 
on computational optimization and validate our results by 
measurements and CFD simulation results reported in the 
academic literature.
CFD simulations facilitate determination of aerodynamic 
coefficients for different disc geometries, with good accu-
racy (Potts and Masters 2015; Lukes et al. 2014; Honeycutt 
2020; Jin et al. 2020). Moreover, typically this computa-
tional approach requires less time and effort and less expen-
sive research infrastructure than is required for experimental 
tests. Many other rotating structures immersed in air flow, 
such as Flettner rotors, have also been successfully studied 
by CFD methods (De Marco et al. 2016). We utilize these 
results in selecting and validating the proposed CFD simula-
tion methodology.
If the aerodynamic and structural parameters of a fly -
ing rotating disc are known, then computer simulations 
can be used for predicting its flight trajectory (although 
validation of such trajectory predictions by experiments 
is, by the above, difficult). Since the pioneering work of 
Hummel (2003) and Hubbard and Hummel (2000), several 
simulation-based approaches have been proposed, includ-
ing validation (Koyanagi et al. 2012). Crowther and Potts  E. Immonen 
1 312 Page 4 of 17
(2007) described a general six degrees-of-freedom simu-
lation approach; Hummel and Hubbard (2002) proposed 
an algorithm for estimating the aerodynamic coefficients 
from measured flight trajectory data. Lissaman and Hub-
bard (2010) studied the maximum ranges of flying discs, and 
Kamaruddin (2011) addressed optimal initial launch con-
ditions for maximal flight range. Optimal flight conditions 
for discus were considered in simulations by Hubbard and 
Cheng (2007). In the present article, we address disc trajec-
tories indirectly by aerodynamic and 