Vol.:(0123456789)
Sports Engineering (2022) 25:26 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12283-022-00390-5
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Disc golf trajectory modelling combining computational fluid 
dynamics and rigid body dynamics
Knut Erik Teigen Giljarhus1  · Mika Tobias Gooding1 · Joar Njærheim1
Accepted: 25 October 2022 / Published online: 16 November 2022 
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
In the sport of disc golf, athletes utilize discs with various shapes to achieve their desired throws. Computational methods 
have the potential to give further insight into how the disc shape and throw parameters influence the disc trajectory. A 
methodology is presented that combines computational fluid dynamics to obtain the aerodynamic coefficients for a given 
disc shape, with rigid body dynamics to simulate the disc golf flight. The computational fluid dynamics simulations were 
performed in OpenFOAM, and compared against wind tunnel experiments from the literature. The trajectory model was 
implemented in an open-source software, and compared against simulated trajectories against measured trajectories of actual 
disc golf throws. The methodology was applied to three different discs, comparing their aerodynamic coefficients and flight 
trajectories. How the disc shape impacts lift, drag and moment coefficients and corresponding flight trajectories is discussed. 
The methodology has the potential to consistently characterize the flight of a disc and lead to greater understanding of disc 
flight, and thereby contribute to both training, disc development and regulation.
Keywords Simulation · Sports projectiles · Aerodynamics
1 Introduction
Disc golf is a sport where the players throw discs at a tar -
get, with rules similar to golf. In recent years, the sport has 
seen significant growth [1 , 2]. From a sports engineering 
and aerodynamics perspective, the sport is interesting as it 
is arguably the sport with the broadest range of projectile 
shapes. Compared to other sports, where typically only one 
projectile is used, a disc golf athlete can carry more than 
twenty different discs in a competition. The choice of disc 
for a particular throw depends on the distance to the target, 
obstacles on the way to the target and wind conditions. The 
sport was made possible by utilizing discs with a triangular 
rim [3]. This design yielded improved aerodynamics com-
pared to former flying discs, such as the Frisbee [4 ], and 
the increased amount of mass in the rim gives it increased 
gyroscopic stability, which is crucial for control in a sports 
setting. The current technical standards [5 ] for disc design 
gives a large amount of flexibility, leading to a high number 
of manufacturers with a wide range of designs. The current 
methodology for determining the flight characteristics uses 
a rating system with four numbers; speed, glide, turn and 
fade. However, the system is subjective, with no standard 
way of determining the numbers. Scientific methods, such as 
experimental testing, computational analysis and mathemati-
cal models, have the potential to consistently characterize 
the flight of a disc. Such studies can also lead to greater 
understanding of disc flight, and thereby contribute to both 
training and disc development.
The scientific studies on disc golf flight are relatively 
sparse, with much of the available literature focusing on 
Frisbee-like geometries. In Ref. [6], a comprehensive experi-
mental study on the aerodynamic characteristics of a Frisbee 
was performed. Results were found to be independent of 
Reynolds number, and spin did not significantly influence 
the aerodynamic coefficients for typical spin ratios. The 
Open access funding provided by University Of Stavanger.
This article is a part of a Topical Collection in Sports Engineering 
on The Engineering of Sport 14 Conference held at Purdue 
University USA, edited by Dr Hugo Espinosa, Steven Shade, Dr 
Kim Blair and Professor Jan-Anders Månsson.
 * Knut Erik Teigen Giljarhus 
 knut.e.giljarhus@uis.no
1 Department of Mechanical and Structural Engineering 
and Materials Science, Faculty of Science and Technology, 
University of Stavanger, PB 8600, 4036 Stavanger, Norway K. E. T. Giljarhus et al.
26 Page 2 of 9
negligible influence of spin was also confirmed in Ref. [7 ] 
using computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations. The 
investigation in Ref. [6 ] was later extended to discs with 
triangular rims in Ref. [8]. In Refs. [9, 10], CFD simulations 
were performed for flying discs and compared against the 
experiments of Ref. [8], with reasonable agreement in aero-
dynamic coefficients. In addition to wind tunnel experiments 
and CFD simulations, there are also examples on using on-
board instrumentation to both track the flight and estimate 
aerodynamic coefficients [11–13]. In Ref. [14], a kinematic 
model was developed for Frisbee flight and combined with 
flight trajectory experiments to estimate aerodynamic coef-
ficients. The kinematic model was based on Newton-Euler 
equations for rigid bodies. A similar model was used in Ref. 
[15] to investigate the influence of initial disc launch param-
eters on the Frisbee flight.
This work combines CFD simulations to obtain the aer -
odynamics properties of a disc with rigid body dynamics 
to simulate the flight of disc golf discs. A computational 
methodology for determining the aerodynamic coefficients is 
presented, along with an open-source flight trajectory model 
to simulate the disc golf flight. The CFD model is compared 
against available wind tunnel data [8], while experiments are 
performed to assess the accuracy of the trajectory model.
2  Methods
2.1  Disc geometries
The disc geometry was obtained by using a side profile 
image to trace the outer shape and using an Artec Eva 3D 
scanner in HD mode to trace the inner rim. A spline was 
created from a slice of the disc, which was then revolved to 
create a 3D model. The moments of inertia are also needed 
by the rigid body dynamics model, and were found directly 
from the 3D geometry file using the trimesh Python 
library.
Figure  1a shows the side profile of the discs used in this 
work. The discs are commercial discs in Star plastic from 
Innova (Innova Champion Discs Inc., California, United 
States), namely a distance driver of model Wraith (DD), 
and two control drivers of models Firebird (CD) and Road-
runner (CD2).
Discs are typically made from plastic using injection 
molding. Due to variability in plastics, and also production 
conditions such as temperature and humidity, there can be 
slight differences in the disc shape and dimensions that can 
influence the aerodynamic performance. Figure 1b shows an 
image of the nose of two DD discs used in the flight trajec-
tory experiments. It is evident that the height to the leading 
edge is different in the two discs, with a difference of about 
3 mm, which will influence the flight. For the experiments, 
multiple discs were used for repeated throws, and the discs 
were visually inspected to ensure they had only minor dif-
ferences in shape.
2.2  Computational fluid dynamics
CFD simulations are performed using the open-source 
OpenFOAM CFD software [16, 17]. The SIMPLE method 
was used for pressure-velocity coupling, and turbulence was 
modelled using the k-omega shear stress transport (SST) 
model [18].
Second-order discretization schemes were used for all 
variables, and in particular the second-order linear upwind 
scheme was used for the convective terms [19].
10.55 cm
2.1 cm
1.36 cm
0.51 cm
0.96 cm
0.64 cm
1.17 cm
0.59 cm
1.9 cm
1.9 cm
DD
CD
CD2
(a)
5m m
(b)
Fig. 1  a Side profile of discs with specifications. b Illustration of difference in flight plate height for two DD discsDisc golf trajectory modelling combining computational fluid dynamics and rigid body dynamics  
 Page 3 of 9 26
The computational domain was a rectangle with dimen-
sions 20D × 10D × 10D , where D is the disc diameter. The 
disc was placed in the center, 5D  from the inlet. The disc 
was kept fixed in the simulations, as spin has been shown 
to have negligible influence on the aerodynamic coeffi-
cients [6, 7]. The inlet velocity was set to 26.9 m/s, which 
corresponds to a disc Reynolds number of 3.78 × 105 . The 
Reynolds number is defined as Re = UD∕/u1D708 , where U is 
the inlet velocity and /u1D708 is the kinematic viscosity of air. 
At the outlet a fixed value of zero for pressure was used 
and zero gradient conditions for the remaining fields. Slip 
conditions were applied at the sides.
The mesh is illustrated in Fig.  2. A new mesh was gen-
erated for each angle of attack, ensuring cells are aligned 
with the flow and yielding high resolution in the wake. 
A total of 7 2:1 refinement levels were used towards the 
disc surface, giving a cell size of 0.3 mm in the vicinity 
the disc. Additionally, 15 prism layers were inserted near 
the surface to resolve the boundary layer, with a minimum 
size of 20 µm and an expansion ratio of 1.2. This gave a 
maximum y+ value less than 2 and an average y+ value 
less than 0.5 for all cases. The total grid size was about 
23 million cells. The simulation was performed for 6000 
iterations, after which the scaled residuals for the equa-
tions and the variations in aerodynamic coefficients were 
below 1 × 10−4.
The forces on the disc were calculated by integrating 
the pressure contribution and the viscous contribution over 
the disc surface. From this the aerodynamic coefficients 
were calculated using the following standard definitions:
(1)FD = qCDS
(2)FL = qCLS
(3)M = qCM DS
where CD , CL and CM denote the drag, lift and pitching 
moment coefficients, respectively. q = 0.5/u1D70CU2 is the dynamic 
pressure and S is the disc planform area.
2.3  Rigid body dynamics
The rigid body dynamic model is based on flight vehicle 
dynamics [20] and previous work on disc trajectory model-
ling [14, 15].
The disc is described by a location vector, x =( x, y, z) and 
an attitude vector using Euler angles, /u1D73D=( /u1D719,/u1D703, /u1D713).
By using a series of coordinate transformations (see 
Appendix A and Online Resource 1), the equations of 
motion can be written in a straight-forward manner, directly 
using the aerodynamic force coefficients calculated in the 
CFD simulations. The four coordinate systems are, 
1. Earth axes  - fixed coordinate system with the origin 
placed at the ground of the position for the release of 
the disc.
2. Disc axes - coordinate system moving with the disc, 
found by translation of the location vector and a 
sequence of rotations defined by the attitude vector.
3. Zero sideslip axes - coordinate system found by rotating 
around the z2 axis by the sideslip angle.
Fig. 2  Illustration of compu-
tational mesh. a Overall grid 
structure. b lose-up of layers 
near disc surface
Fig. 3  Illustration of forces acting on the disc K. E. T. Giljarhus et al.
26 Page 4 of 9
4. Wind axes - rotating the disc around the y3 axis by the 
angle of attack, /u1D6FC , to obtain the coordinate system used 
in the CFD simulations.
The forces acting on the disc are illustrated in Fig.  3. The 
calculation procedure is as follows. From the initial condi-
tion, convert the velocity to the disc axes using the attitude 
vector,
Note that the subscripts here corresponds to the respective 
coordinate system numbers, i.e. u1 is the velocity in the earth 
axes. Also note that the wind velocity can also be included 
by subtracting from the initial velocity. The sideslip angle 
is then found using the horizontal velocity components in 
the disc axes,
This angle is used to transform to the zero sideslip axes,
The angle of attack for the disc can now be found from the 
velocities in this coordinate system,
Finally, the velocity is converted to the wind axes by rotating 
around this angle of attack,
Now the forces can be calculated using the expressions in 
Eqs.  1 and 2  with aerodynamic coefficients from the CFD 
simulations. The force vector is given by
Here, the gravitational force, g1 =[ 0, 0, −mg]T , is also trans-
formed to the wind axes,
For the attitude vector, the trajectory model assumes a con-
stant spin rate and only considers the roll of the disc caused 
by gyroscopic precession. This is a simplification assuming 
the disc is thrown without any wobble during the release. 
The roll occurs in the zero sideslip axes, hence the expres-
sion for the angular velocities is
Here, the moment M  is calculated using the coefficient of 
moment from the CFD calculation, Eq.  3. The moments of 
(4)u2 = T12(/u1D73D)u1.
(5)/u1D6FD= −atan2(v 2, u2)
(6)u3 = T23(/u1D6FD)u2.
(7)/u1D6FC= −atan2(w 3, u3)
(8)u4 = T34(/u1D6FC)u3.
(9)F4 = g4 + [−FD, 0, FL]T .
(10)g4 = T14(/u1D73D,/u1D6FD, /u1D6FC)g1.
(11)̇/u1D73D3 =
/bracketleft.s3
− M
𝜔(I xy − Iz),0 ,0
/bracketright.s3T
.
inertia, Ixy and Iz , are found from the geometry models. /u1D714 is 
the angular velocity of the disc.
These values are finally transformed back to the ground 
coordinate system before advancing the simulation,
The actual integration is performed using numerical inte-
gration routines from the SciPy library, more specifically 
using an explicit Runge-Kutta method of order 5 [21]. The 
full simulation code is implemented in Python and made 
available in the open-source sports projectile trajectory 
simulator Shotshaper [22], developed by the authors. The 
simulator has also been compared against experiments on 
spinning and non-spinning balls from Ref. [23], with differ-
ences in trajectory of less than 5 %. These simulations can 
be found in the source code.
2.4  Disc trajectory experiments
Experiments were performed by tracking the disc during 
actual throws. The throws are made by a player rated as an 
intermediate player according to the PDGA rating system 
[24]. The athlete gave informed consent to participate in 
the study, and the study was conducted in accordance with 
the ethical standards of the University of Stavanger and the 
Declaration of Helsinki [25].
Four cameras were used for the tracking, as illustrated 
in Fig.  4. Three of the cameras were used to estimate the 
release conditions of the disc, while the fourth camera 
was used to track the projected disc trajectory (see Online 
Resource 2). The back camera was placed behind the player, 
level with the release point of the disc, and was used for 
measuring the roll angle of the disc. The side camera was 
placed to the side of the release point, and was used to meas-
ure the pitch angle, nose angle and release velocity. The 
ground camera was placed below the release point, and was 
used to measure the spin of the disc. A straight line was 
drawn on the bottom plate of disc to measure the number 
of frames for one full revolution. These three cameras were 
GoPro HERO10 (GoPro Inc., California, United States) 
cameras with a video resolution of 2704 × 1520 and a frame 
rate of 240 FPS. The drone camera was a DJI Mini 2 (SZ DJI 
Technology Co. Ltd., Shenzhen, China) drone, with a r